Good day i'm Norman Wildberger in this video we're
carrying on with reciprocals powers of 10 and
euler's totient function and we're going to look
at an interesting algebraic structure associated
to a natural number called the unit group and this
is going to sort of solidify or frame a lot of
the discussion about just how powers of 10 look
like mod a number n and correspondingly how to
anticipate what 1 over n looks like as a decimal
with some repeated structure but know how be that
repeated loop is so last time we were looking
especially saying at multiplication by 10 mod 13
and here's a visual way of trying to see what's
going on there by thinking about the nonzero
numbers mod 13 in a in a circle a familiar kind
of clock circle so it puts 0 somewhere else here
and here are the numbers 1 through 12 then what
we can do is we can think about multiplication by
10 is something that takes a particular number and
sends it to 10 times that number so if we multiply
1 by 10 we get 10 of course when we multiply by
10 again we get 9 that's because 10 times 10 is a
hundred but mod 13 well 7 times 13 is 91 so we can
throw that away and 100 is the same as 9 so we get
this or cycle from 1 to 10 - 9 - 12 - 3 - 4 and
then back to 1 so it's a cycle of 6 elements the
remaining numbers let's say we start at 2 then the
cycle goes to 7 because 2 times 7 is 20 which is
congruent to 7 mod 13 and then when we multiply
by 10 we get 5 and then up to 11 you can check
down to six over two eight and back up to two
so there's another cycle log six so we have two
cycles of ninety-six and this sort of explains why
the reciprocals involving 13 in the denominator
come in to sort of families one associated to
one cycle of six and the other associated to
another cycle of six so we'd like to extend this
understanding but in particularly like to move to
some more general numbers not just prime numbers
all right so while that discussion was revolving
around multiplication by ten mod thirteen we could
in fact of course multiply any two numbers mod 13
and that's actually an interesting thing to do
and here is the multiplication table when we
multiply any two nonzero numbers nonzero numbers
mod 13 so the numbers from 1 to 12 1 to 12 here's
a multiplication table that gives you all possible
products so for example four times nine that says
that's ten that's because 4 times 9 is 36 and
you can throw away 26 which is a multiple of 13
and you get 10 now this is a very interesting
structure because it's a commutative group
we've talked about groups earlier in this series
and they're very nice algebraic structures you
basically have a multiplication like this which
has a few important properties not a lot just a
few first of all it should be associative if you
have three numbers and you multiply first these
two and then this one you get the same thing
as what happens when you multiply these two
first and then this one the associative property
another important property is that there should be
a identity element in this case with like 1 which
has the property that 1 times anything is suspect
anything in either order that's the reason why the
first row and column are very simple in this table
and finally there should be an inverse to every
element so if you look at any row say this role
here there should be the number 1 somewhere in it
in exactly one place that means that four times is
equal to 1 can we say that 4 and 10 are inverse
elements in this group so that's basically what
you require for grouping use associativity you
need an identity and once you know an identity
you need inverses for all the elements the inverse
of the identity is just itself so this is a group
and it has a name you thirteen the unit group of
13 and the multiplication by 10 that we were just
looking at is really contained in this single
row here so this row is telling us what happens
when we multiply by 10 if we multiply 1 by 10
we get 10 if we multiply 10 by 10 we get to 12
we multiply 10 by 10 we get 3 and so on ok so
there's actually a lot more information here
than just in that multiplication by 10 story now
it's a lovely fact that this kind of unit group
algebraic structure works not just for a prime
number but in fact for any number even if it's
composite but for a compass that number we have
to do something a little bit more special than
we do for prime numbers so here's what we do
when n is a general number so U of n well it's
a set of natural numbers K everything is the
national number here K where K is between 1
and n so starting with 1 included but all the way
up to but not including in and with the property
that K and n are relatively prime that means they
have no common factor that's what this notation
means kanan are relatively prime and that's set
then is called the unit group of n when we give
it a multiplication the multiplication
is multiplication mod n the number we're
starting with now this turns out to be a group on
account of the following two sort of fundamental
propositions the first is that if you have two
numbers m and K which are both relatively prime
to n in other words they're sitting inside here
then their product is also relative we prime to n
so of em has no common factor with N and K has no
common factor with n then M times K will have no
common factor with n that's what this proposition
say and believe it to you as an exercise to prove
it and the second proposition is that if m and n
are relatively prime then there is another number
a with the property that a is also relatively
prime to n and furthermore m times a is congruent
to 1 mod n this is also an interesting exercise we
have derived enough to be able to figure this out
if you go back in the not last dozen or so videos
you'll you'll see the the clue there somewhere so
it's an interesting exercise to figure out why
that is so these are the basic two facts that
reveal that this is an active group and it's a
commutative group because multiplication in this
context is commutative that's a very important
additional property that these kind of the unit
groups have they are commutative so let's look
at some examples when n is 2 then there's only
one number less than 2 which is relatively prime
to do which is the number 1 so it's a very simple
group it's a group with one element and the
multiplication is the only thing that it can
be 1 times 1 is 1 when n is 3 then there are 2
numbers involved in this unit group 1 and 2 and
the multiplication is this 1 times 1 is 1 1 times
2 is 2 2 times 1 is 2 those are all obvious and 2
times 2 is 1 because mod 3 4 is the same as 1
here's the table for N equals 4 here's a table
for N equals 5 that's another prime so that looks
a lot like well the 13 example in some fashion we
have all the numbers from 1 up to love M minus 1
here is N equals 6 there's only two numbers which
are relatively prime to 6 daily 1 5 so this group
structure is really pretty well the same as this
group structure just that the labels are different
but as groups they're really pretty well the same
and of course throughout here there's an obvious
connection with the Euler Phi function because
the Euler Phi function counts exactly how many
numbers are in these UN groups the water Phi
function is counting how many numbers there are
less than n which are relatively prime to n so 5n
is the same as the number of elements in this set
um okay how about N equals seven there's the u7
group multiplication table it's a prime so we're
including all the numbers from 1 to 7 and it's
a nice little pattern we see that there's one
number of each kind each row and finding each
column and it's very pleasant little thing but I
should remind you that the really deep structure
involved in this table is the associative law the
fact that if you take any three numbers like 4
2 & 6 if you multiply 4 times 2 you get 1 and if
you multiply 1 times 6 you get 6 but if you do
in the other order 2 times 6 first is 5 and then
4 times 5 is also 4 times 5 is 6 again so we get
the same thing this way or this way there's the
u8 group 5 8 is for you 9 that's also interesting
that's a power of a prime not quite a prime but
not too far removed from being a prime there are
six in that group and u10 is this one here which
also has four elements but if you stare at it
you'll see that there's something different about
you 10 and you eight these are not really the same
groups they're not all the same groups and you
might like to convince yourself of that so there's
something algebraically and distinguished about
these various UN's so there's a lot to say here
right we're covering number theory and also group
theory at the same time so if we did this properly
we would have to spend a little more time so what
I want to do is just give you an overview of some
basic facts just to tell you enough so that you
have an appreciation for what we're doing with
this aiming at you know understanding reciprocals
of natural Mars so here are some facts about UN
and in a course in number theory or perhaps group
Theory wanted to prove these facts and it's quite
pleasant to do that but I'm not going to so one
fact we already mentioned of course very important
that this is actually a commutative group and
another word for commutative is abelian they
mean the same thing if n is P a prime so the case
when we're talking about a prime then this group
un is a very special kind of commutative group
it's what's called a cyclic group and what that
means is that there's some number m in the group
that has the property that the whole group can be
expressed as just powers of that single element M
so if we start with M and write M Squared and then
n cubed and then M to the fourth and so on and we
go all the way as far as we can before we get to
come back to one then we gone through the entire
group now such a an element is rather special it's
called a primitive element it's in general not
unique but it's a little bit mysterious how to
find such a primitive element for a general prime
P in fact it's not just a little bit mysterious
it's very mysterious okay so in many cases the
smallest obvious examples of M equals two or
three will work so if you have a prime P you'll
want to know what is a primitive element your
best guess is M equals two and that doesn't work
you can try M equals three but that doesn't always
work so there's no real good general rule that
tells you what is a good primitive element for a
given prime and give unit group of a given prime
another very important property in this business
is this crucial property of the euler totient
function so if you have two numbers and m and
they are relatively prime then Phi of n times M
equals 5 n times 5 m this allows you to build up
or compute Phi of bigger numbers from knowing
Phi's of various factors and another kind of
special case is that what n is actually a power of
a prime say P to the K for some prime P then the
Euler function 5n has the pleasent formula it's P
to the K minus P to the K minus 1 so basically you
take all the numbers from 1 to n and you remove
all the multiples of P in that range ok so these
are some facts about U of N or The Associated
boiler torsion function now one more thing that
we really need to know is a fundamental fact from
elementary group theory so we haven't done group
theory efficiently but you will understand the
meaning of this nevertheless so it has to do with
something called the order of an element so if
G is a group rather a general group and little G
is actually a particular element of that group
then we say that the order of G denoted order
G is the smallest K smallest natural number
K such that G to the K equals 1 so you look
up just powers of G and eventually you get 1 and
when you do that first time you get 1 that power
is the order of J and I might say that for us
all the groups were considering our so-called
finite groups so in the rest of mathematics
people consider other kinds of groups but
from our point of view a group is intrinsically a
finite group we haven't yet defined what it might
mean to be a non finite group because we don't
have a notion of and finite sets yet and maybe
we never will so we'll have to circumvent that
and define infinite groups in some more indirect
way when eventually we do but until then group
means a finite set a finite to multiplication
table everything concrete specifiable you
see the whole thing right in front of you
alright so an example that if you look in the unit
group of seven that you can check that the order
of the element two is three the order of three
happens to be two the order of the element four
is three the order of five is six and the order
of six equals two from this data we can see that
five is a little bit special because you need six
powers of it to get back to one that means that
the various powers of five will cycle through all
of the elements of the group so that's actually
a generator or a primitive element for seven
and here that is Lagrange's here one of the
most fundamental and perhaps beautiful theorems
in group theory which says that for any group G
and any little G in that group G the order of
that element divides the number of elements in
the group all right so the order of any element
is a factor or divisor of the number of elements
in the group it's a very beautiful result we're
not going to prove it we're just gonna lay it
out here so you can have a look at it okay we're
interested in this problem of trying to understand
what the reciprocals of natural numbers look like
has repeated decimals particular how long is the
repeated part of a fraction one over and when
you write it out as a decimal so we are in a good
position now to really understand what's going on
here so let's have a look at first of all a larger
prime so 139 is a prime so what should we expect
for the length of the repeating cycle in one over
39 well first of all five 139 is one minus that
number so it's 138 and I given you here the prime
factorization of 138 it's two times three times
twenty-three so the number of elements in the unit
group of 139 is 138 all the numbers less than
139 are relatively prime to it so the order of
ten in this group should divide 138 if we look at
powers of 10 and ask ourselves how many powers do
we have to go before we finally get back to
one that's exactly the order of ten in this
group and according to lagron that order should
divide a hundred and thirty eight that's a very
powerful piece of information and we've seen that
in previous examples in the last video but now we
have a kind of group theoretical understanding
or explanation of it so there's not that many
possible factors of 138 because there's its
prime factorization so let's let's try some
things let's have a look at ten to the hundred
and thirty-eight first well we're not surprised
to find that ten to one hundred thirty-eight mod
139 is one if you raise ten to the power of 138
yes you eventually get back to 1 mod 139 so in
this mod n is 39 is really what's happening in
this multiplication in this group but maybe we can
do better maybe we can find a smaller power of 10
that will also be equal to one maybe we don't have
to multiply 10 139 times but maybe some factor of
this why don't we choose the factors say 3 times
23 which is 69 so 10 to the 69 mod 139 my computer
will tell me instantly what that is that's 138
that's not equal to one so the order of 10 is
not 69 let's try a different factor how about say
instead of those two maybe those two two times 23
which is 46 well then ten to the 46 mod 139 my
computer tells me that's equal to one so we have
found now a smaller possible order of ten in this
group but maybe something smaller will work maybe
just two times three let's see that works 10
to the 6 mod 139 is 34 that's not gonna work so
this number 46 is the smallest possible divisor
that has that property the 10 to it is equal to
one so this is actually the order of ten in this
group well we've seen that's exactly the length
of the repeated part of the decimal expansion
and here is the decimal expansion of 1 over 1
39 point zero zero seven one nine four two four
etc and you can see it there and you can count
the number of elements in that repeated segment
and it repeats all the way from zero zero up to
four one is exactly forty six and now let's have
a look at a more complicated example where we have
a composite number so our n here is going to be
this number here which is the product of these
two primes 163 times 18,000 301 so what should be
the length of the repeating cycle if we look at 1
over this end okay so we're going to proceed as
before first of all we look at the euler totient
function Phi of n so n is a product of these two
things these are relatively prime so this is going
to be 5 163 times Phi of 18 301 because these are
relatively prime and 5 163 well that's a prime so
it's 5 function it's just one less than it this
is also prime so it's 5 functions also one less
than it and so the product of these two is this
number here which it's important for us to have
factorisation there's its factorization is 2
cubed 3 to the fifth 5 squared times 61 okay
so we're interested in what is the order of
ten in this group in the group U of n so this
is a bigger group now if we had to write out the
multiplication table it would be a very big table
because it would have this many rows of columns
but we can do calculations in it just by making
calculations mod n so we're interested in that
what power do you have to raise 10 to to get one
that's the magic number so we start with the full
number here and we just check that when we take
ten to this number to five n we get 1 mod n that's
as it should be that's what euler's theorem tells
us because 10 and n are relatively prime okay so
now we have the idea that we're going to look at
smaller possible numbers and we're gonna get those
smaller numbers by throwing away some of these
prime factors to ensure that we still have divisor
of this thing so let's throw a 61 so now we just
have to cube 3 to the fifth 5 squared and we look
at this thing mod n and we find that existing here
which is definitely not one okay so we put the
61 back and we think about the 5 maybe we'll just
throw away a factor of 5 so we just have a 5 there
instead of 5 squared when we calculate 10 to that
power mod and we also don't get 1 so no problem
we put the 5 squared back and we think about the
powers of 3 let's lower the 3 to 3 to the 4 well
that turns out to give us 1 but if we lower it
one more to 3 cubed it turns out that we don't get
1 so we can lower it by 1 and we're okay finally
what about the powers of 2 if we lower the 2 cube
to a 2 squared and we'll still keep this 3 to the
4th then this thing mod n is equal and if you
do it one more time with lowering it to just two
times all of this then you see that in fact you
don't get one so this ends up being the smallest
number that we can find such that 10 to this power
mod n is equal to 1 and that's telling us that
the answer to our original question is that the
order that we're looking for the length of this
repeating cycle will be 2 squared times 3 to the
4th times 5 squared times 61 which is 4 9 4 100
telling us that if we look at 1 over this number
that's going to repeat with a period of four
hundred ninety-four thousand and 100 okay so we're
in a great position now to understand what happens
with Z that's what we do next time and we're
going to address the question of the why does
the unique factorization breakdown present and
was a Euclid wrong what's actually wrong with
Euclid's proof hope you'll join me for that
I'm Norman wildberger thanks for listening